---
title: 'From electrical resistivity tomography to soil water content: Towards a novel Ensemble Approach'
description: Electrical Resistivity Tomography is increasingly used to study subsurface hydrological processes. It shows strong potential for estimating soil water content, an essential yet challenging property to quantify. We propose an innovative method called the Ensemble Approach ERT, which consists of building an ensemble model of subsurface electrical resistivity, calibrated using in situ data, and then converted into spatially distributed water content.
---

# Abstract

Electrical Resistivity Tomography (ERT) is increasingly used to study subsurface hydrological processes. It shows strong potential for estimating soil water content, an essential yet challenging property to quantify. Indeed, converting electrical resistivity into water content remains complex, as it relies on nonlinear relationships that are highly dependent on local soil conditions (e.g., clay content). This yields a strong motivation to develop new approaches aimed at improving estimates while facilitating uncertainty assessment. In this context, we propose an innovative method called the Ensemble Approach ERT (EA-ERT), which consists of building an ensemble model of subsurface electrical resistivity, calibrated using in situ data, and then converted into spatially distributed water content. This approach combines time-lapse ERT data with point-scale in situ measurements of water content. It enables (i) overcoming the issue of inversion parameter selection by evaluating the performance of a large number of models, (ii) providing an estimate of uncertainties in the final model through the spread among the combined models, and (iii) converting electrical resistivity data into water content. The EA-ERT method was first applied on a relatively homogeneous agricultural site located in Avignon, southern France. The site consists of a wheat field on clay-loam soil and benefits from a large dataset. An ensemble model of electrical resistivity, obtained by combining several inversions, was selected and then converted into water content. Results show good agreement between water content estimated with ERT and neutron probe measurements. Areas of high uncertainty were also identified. The method was then applied to more heterogeneous karstic forest sites, where it also proved robust. The EA-ERT approach provides a first exploratory step towards a reliable and automatable solution for converting ERT data into parameters of interest. This contributes to improved monitoring and understanding of hydrological and ecohydrological processes within the critical zone.