---
title: Evaluating the precrop effect of legumes using electromagnetic induction
description: Grain legumes play an important role in the transition to more sustainable agroecological cropping systems. This study evaluated how leguminous versus non-leguminous precrops influence soil moisture patterns and subsequent cereal yields, using repeated electromagnetic induction measurements as a non-invasive monitoring tool.
---

# Abstract

Grain legumes play an important role in the transition to more sustainable agroecological cropping systems. Incorporating them into traditional crop rotations can offer a wide range of benefits, both nitrogen and non-nitrogen related. Nevertheless, the underlying non-nitrogen mechanisms remain insufficiently quantified. Improved soil porosity, aggregation and water holding capacity after legumes have been proposed as water-related benefits potentially enhancing soil water availability [@10.4141/P01-116; @10.1016/j.still.2018.10.003; @https://doi.org/10/b7hkdb]. This study evaluated how leguminous versus non-leguminous precrops influence soil moisture patterns and subsequent cereal yields, using repeated electromagnetic induction (EMI) measurements as a non-invasive monitoring tool.
Precrop effects of legumes (faba bean, pea and kidney bean) and cereals (malting barley, baking wheat and durum wheat) on a following cereal crop were analysed in a three-year field experiment (2023–2025). EMI surveys (CMD Mini-Explorer 6L) were performed at multiple timepoints during the growing season. Apparent electrical conductivity (ECa) values were temperature- and drift-corrected and were statistically analysed using mixed linear models. Yield of cereals was quantified at harvest and related to ECa measurements.
A significant yield increase was observed after legumes, yielding on average 0.9 ton DM/ha extra compared to cereal precrops. Within and across seasons, significant differences in ECa measurements were observed between treatments. Absolute ECa values were generally lower after legumes compared to after cereals, indicating an increased water uptake after legumes. These observations relate well with the enhanced biomass production when legumes were grown as precrop. This study highlights the potential of EMI measurements to give insight in belowground processes driving legume-related rotational benefits.
