---
title: Combined Geophysical and UAV-based Soil Property Characterization – Best Practices and Future Directions
description: Increasing global population and living standards require greater agricultural production than ever before. Simultaneously, reductions in the availability of arable land and fresh water require more efficient use of natural resources. Recent research shows how the combination of geophysical and UAV-based techniques can be used to rapidly characterize soil properties over an entire field.
---

# Abstract

Increasing global population and living standards require greater agricultural production than ever before. Simultaneously, reductions in the availability of arable land and fresh water require more efficient use of natural resources. Precision agriculture can increase productivity while reducing inputs, but this requires high-resolution characterization of soil properties throughout a field. Conventional point-based measurements are generally insufficient to capture soil heterogeneity, but geophysical methods can quickly provide thousands of measurements across a field. However, geophysical methods also have limitations, such as cost and the time and expertise needed to process data. Also, geophysical data are typically acquired in traverses rather than across the entire field, so heterogeneity between traverses is not captured. Recent advances in uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) technology may help to fill in gaps left by geophysical methods. UAV data can be acquired rapidly over the entire field, and the cost of UAV instrumentation and processing is relatively low. However, UAV sensors do not directly measure soil properties, so relationships between UAV-based data and soil properties are needed.
Recent research shows how the combination of geophysical and UAV-based techniques can be used to rapidly characterize soil properties over an entire field. Case studies using electromagnetic induction (EMI), ground penetrating radar (GPR), and UAV-based multispectral and thermal data investigate the potential of UAV-based data for measuring soil properties such as soil water content (SWC) and apparent electrical conductivity (ECa) for different crop types, soil moisture conditions, and subsurface drainage configurations. The efficacy of different types of UAV-based data, including optical, multispectral, thermal, and terrain indices, for predicting SWC and ECa are investigated. Results show that relationships between UAV-based data and geophysical data are complex and cannot be easily captured by deterministic relationships, but that machine learning (ML) approaches can be used to predict soil properties when geophysical and UAV-based data are used as inputs. Research applying ML to GPR, EMI, and UAV-based datasets in fields containing maize, soybeans, and alfalfa, as well as vineyards, shows that the most accurate prediction of SWC and ECa occurs when both multispectral and thermal UAV-based data are used. If only one type of sensor is used, multispectral data are usually more important than thermal data, but if both multispectral and thermal data are acquired, thermal data are more important than any single multispectral band. Predictions of soil properties are most accurate when limited to a single crop type, and in most cases, wetter soil allows better prediction of soil properties than drier soil. When data are acquired in terraced fields, using UAV-based terrain indices significantly improves SWC and ECa estimation.
The joint use of geophysical methods and UAVs for soil characterization is expected to increase in the future. The most significant challenge to the combined use of geophysical techniques and UAVs is to find ways to make prediction less site-specific and more accessible to non-expert users. Other challenges include GPS accuracy, software development to easily match scales and footprints between different techniques, and data processing of thermal data to create digitally manipulatable raster files.
