---
title: Investigating the effect of sugar beets and maize crops on EMI and GPR signals
description: Agrogeophysical methods have demonstrated high potential to face upcoming challenges posed by climate change, such as water scarcity. Here, we combined Electromagnetic Induction and Ground Penetrating Radar  to investigate small-scale changes linked to different cropping systems over different periods of the growing season.
---

# Abstract

Agrogeophysical methods have demonstrated high potential to face upcoming challenges posed by climate change, such as water scarcity. Especially, the combination of the electromagnetic methods Electromagnetic Induction (EMI) and Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) provides solutions for the efficient use of water resources by mapping electrical conductivity and dielectric permittivity without disturbing the soil. While EMI can map conductivity changes over the measurement area related to Soil Water Content (SWC), clay content, and ion concentration, GPR shows stratigraphical changes in permittivity and conductivity along profiles, which can be related to SWC and soil structure changes.

Here, we combined both methods to investigate small-scale changes linked to different cropping systems over different periods of the growing season. Over a three-month period, EMI and GPR measurements were conducted on three separate days in a field at Campus Klein-Altendorf (Germany), which was cultivated with maize and sugar beets. The obtained conductivity and permittivity distributions were investigated, and we attempted to relate them to the SWC distribution and determine the impact of both root systems on the signals. For both techniques, different survey designs were tested, and data processing was performed to allow time-lapse comparisons between datasets. This study visualizes and interprets the variations in electrical conductivity and dielectric permittivity across the measurement area. To validate the findings and constrain the resulting maps, both soil and crop samples were excavated and analyzed after each measurement, obtaining several soil and root parameters, including soil and root water content, sugar beet dimensions, and maize root growth angles.
