---
title: 'Coupling Functional-Structural Plant and Electromagnetic Wave Modeling: A gprMax-CPlantBox Framework for Root-Zone Studies'
description: Soil-water-crop interactions influence plant growth and productivity. As climate change disrupts agriculture, it is crucial to understand these dynamics to sustain yields through beneficial root phenotypes. We used gprMax, an open-source 3D finite-difference time-domain EM simulation tool, to model EM waves in agricultural soils.
---

# Abstract

Soil-water-crop interactions influence plant growth and productivity. As climate change disrupts agriculture, it is crucial to understand these dynamics to sustain yields through beneficial root phenotypes. However, the opaque nature of soils makes in-situ root phenotyping often destructive and unrepeatable. Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) offers a promising non-invasive approach to investigate soil structures, soil water content (SWC) and root presence under field conditions.
Currently, interpretations of the GPR signals regarding root presence and activity are scarce. Process-based models that allow forward simulations of the electromagnetic (EM) waves in the presence of roots can help to overcome this gap. We used gprMax, an open-source 3D finite-difference time-domain EM simulation tool, to model EM waves in agricultural soils. Root presence was incorporated by computing the dielectric permittivity of a four-phase soil system consisting of soil matrix, water, air, and roots. In the first case study, field-based trench root counts were used to estimate root volume fractions. Results showed that root presence significantly affects electromagnetic wave arrival times, amplitudes, and phase, because of their contrast with soil.
Since field data were limited to e.g., single cultivars, time steps, and SWC conditions, we extended the analysis using the functional-structural plant model CPlantBox coupled with gprMax to simulate different soils, cultivars, SWC conditions, and growth stages. The resulting spatial distributions of roots and SWC were converted into dielectric permittivity and used as input for GPR simulations. This framework enables systematic investigation of how root growth and SWC dynamics influence GPR signals throughout the growing season.
