---
title: Towards a Metadata Framework for Near-Surface Geophysical Data in Agriculture
description: Near-surface geophysical methods are increasingly used in agriculture to characterise soil properties, monitor spatial variability, and support site-specific management. We present an initial metadata framework designed for near-surface geophysical prospecting for agricultural use.
---

# Abstract

Near-surface geophysical methods are increasingly used in agriculture to characterise soil properties, monitor spatial variability, and support site-specific management. These datasets also provide valuable insights into subsurface processes, land-use history and archaeological features. To support this growing field, the work presented here is embedded within a German national research data infrastructure initiative (FAIRagro with NFDI) focused on agricultural sciences, which aims to promote standardised and FAIR-compliant data practices across disciplines. As the volume and diversity of geophysical data increase, harmonised metadata become essential to ensure that data are findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR). 
We present an initial metadata framework designed for near-surface geophysical prospecting for agricultural use. We built the framework on an ontology that structures both method-independent and method-specific information. Within Protégé, terms were organised hierarchically and constraints were introduced to guarantee consistent capture of core metadata while allowing flexibility for additional, method-dependent descriptors. We defined data and object properties to specify formats, incorporate controlled vocabularies and link to established parameter lists. We also began harmonising terminology with existing international standards to promote the consistent use of key parameters and improve comparability across datasets.
The current development stage includes method-independent metadata as well as specific modules for frequency domain electromagnetic induction (FDEM) and magnetic prospection. We will present this initial version to the community to gather feedback and identify areas for improvement, with the aim of refining the framework for future FAIR-oriented data acquisition and sharing workflows.
