---
title: 'Ground water assessment at potential points of recharge in natural environment: A case study of lusaka national park'
description: The assessment of groundwater systems in protected areas is critical for sustainable water resource management, particularly in regions experiencing rapid urbanisation and climate change and variability. This study employed Electrical Resistivity Tomography techniques to investigate groundwater flow resource patterns and identify potential recharge zones and aquifers within Lusaka National Park, Zambia.
---

# Abstract

The assessment of groundwater systems in protected areas is critical for sustainable water resource management, particularly in regions experiencing rapid urbanisation and climate change and variability. This study employed Electrical Resistivity Tomography (ERT) techniques to investigate groundwater flow resource patterns and identify potential recharge zones and aquifers within Lusaka National Park, Zambia. The research aimed to characterise subsurface resistivity variations to delineate aquifer structures and evaluate the spatial heterogeneity of groundwater resources. ERT surveys were conducted at four strategic sites using a Dipole-Dipole array to assess groundwater patterns. Interpretation of the resistivity models identified a promising, localised aquifer at Site 1, adjacent to a natural pond, with a conductive layer (~25 Ω·m) indicating saturation and an intermediate resistivity horizon layer (~251 Ω·m) signifying a productive fractured aquifer. In contrast, the other sites were dominated by high-resistivity bedrock (>1,000 Ω·m), indicating low groundwater potential, with water presence being either anthropogenic (Site 2 dam seepage) or highly seasonal and ephemeral (Sites 3 and 4). These findings demonstrated that groundwater occurrence in the park was not uniform but highly localised within specific fractured and weathered zones, with recharge primarily focused on surface features like ponds. The study also showed that one site (Site 1) represented the highest-priority area for sustainable groundwater development. These findings underscore the necessity of targeted conservation and management strategies to protect critical recharge points and ensure the long-term hydrological integrity of Lusaka National Park