---
title: 'Exploring Soil–Water Dynamics in Dryland and Irrigated Long-Term Crop Rotation Experiments in Uruguay: An Agrogeophysical Approach'
description: Understanding soil–water dynamics is essential for sustainable land management, particularly in agricultural systems facing intensification and climate variability. This study demonstrates that integrating agrogeophysical tools with agronomic data from long-term experiments provides a valuable framework for assessing soil–water dynamics and the long-term impact of crop and pasture rotation and soil conservation strategies.
---

# Abstract

Understanding soil–water dynamics is essential for sustainable land management, particularly in agricultural systems facing intensification and climate variability. Long-term experiments (LTEs) provide an invaluable framework to evaluate the cumulative effects of agronomic strategies on soil structure, hydrological behavior, and overall system resilience. This study focuses on two LTEs located at INIA La Estanzuela, Uruguay, established on a soil association predominantly composed of Argiudolls and Hapluderts. The first LTE, known as the “Old Rotations” (LTE-OR), was established in 1963 and comprises seven rotation systems with three replicates each, totaling 21 rainfed plots. The second LTE, the “Irrigated Rotations” (LTE-IR), was initiated in the 1998 and includes nine irrigated plots.
Both experiments compare crop rotations with and without pasture phases, and one of them with or without fertilizer application, enabling the assessment of these practices as conservation strategies. LTE-OR is situated on gently sloping terrain with a natural gradient of approximately 2–3%. In contrast, LTE-IR is located on land that retains historical terraces constructed in the 1960s. These terraces were originally designed to disrupt slope continuity and mitigate soil erosion. Their presence continues to the present, influencing topographic conditions and soil conservation within the plots.
Since 2019, an agrogeophysical approach was applied in both LTEs, integrating Electrical Resistivity Tomography (ERT), Electromagnetic Induction (EMI), and Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) with soil sampling and laboratory analysis. EMI was used to generate electrical resistivity maps, which revealed lateral variability across the plots and guided the selection of sampling sites, ERT profiles, and double-ring infiltration tests. ERT was employed to investigate vertical variability in electrical resistivity and, indirectly, soil texture and structure. Geophysical data were validated through physical and chemical analyses of soil samples, focusing on degradation indicators such as bulk density, porosity, and organic matter content.
According to previous studies, rotations that included pastures significantly improved key soil properties—such as porosity, structural stability, and organic matter content—compared to continuous cropping systems. These enhancements promoted higher infiltration rates and more uniform moisture distribution. Joint GPR and ERT measurements revealed that thinner upper horizons allow deeper layers to influence EMI signals. ERT revealed vertical resistivity variations linked to horizons properties, corroborated by soil sample analysis.
In the LTE-IR, the A horizon exhibits a more uniform thickness, suggesting effective slope stabilization and long-term soil conservation—likely influenced by the presence of historical terracing. In contrast, the LTE-OR, lacking terracing, exhibited greater variability in horizon depth. Plots under continuous, unfertilized cropping showed visible signs of erosion, including the formation of gullies, reflecting intensified degradation processes. This was evidenced in geophysical images and soil analyses.
This study demonstrates that integrating agrogeophysical tools with agronomic data from LTEs provides a valuable framework for assessing soil–water dynamics and the long-term impact of crop and pasture rotation and soil conservation strategies. The inclusion of pastures and topographic interventions such as terracing play a vital role in soil conservation and hydrological resilience. These investigations will continue under the framework of the Agrosoil project of the Green Era Hub, titled “Agrogeophysics for Sustainable Soil Management under Climate Extremes.”