---
title: Investigating the effect of maize roots and nitrate using horizontal crosshole GPR data – A case study from the field minirhizotron facilities
description: The non-invasive imaging of small-scale soil and root-zone heterogeneities remains a critical yet challenging frontier in agrogeophysics. In recent years, crosshole ground penetrating radar has demonstrated significant potential for providing insights into the soil-plant continuum Here, we present time-lapse horizontal crosshole GPR data acquired at the field minirhizotron facility in Selhausen, Germany.
---

# Abstract

The non-invasive imaging of small-scale soil and root-zone heterogeneities remains a critical yet challenging frontier in agrogeophysics. The interaction between root growth and soil water is strongly influenced by temporal and spatial variability and requires high-resolution geophysical methods to capture these changes. In recent years, crosshole ground penetrating radar (GPR) has demonstrated significant potential for providing insights into the soil-plant continuum. GPR data can provide information about the relative permittivity and electrical conductivity of the subsurface, which can be linked to soil water content and soil salinity, respectively. Here, we present time-lapse horizontal crosshole GPR data acquired at the field minirhizotron facility in Selhausen, Germany. The GPR data were acquired on a weekly basis during a maize vegetation period that received two contrasting nitrogen fertilizer treatments. Our analysis revealed that, while the presence of roots primarily affects relative permittivity variability, fertilizer effects could be identified using envelope analysis. Investigation of the time-lapse horizontal borehole data in combination with numerical modeling indicated that, in the presence of a high contrast between the root zone and the surrounding soil, the root zone can act as an electromagnetic waveguide, causing specific wave propagation events in the data. This improved understanding can be used to bridge observational gaps in root zone dynamics that can be used for improved precision agriculture.