---
title: Optimizing water management zones by clustering geophysical data and remote sensing information
description: Accurately estimating soil moisture is a significant challenge, especially in the context of climate change. A methodological approach combining geophysical data, remote sensing, and hydrological data from multiple sources has been tested to identify optimal water management zones.
---

# Abstract

Accurately estimating soil moisture is a significant challenge, especially in the context of climate change. The ongoing water resource crisis, exacerbated by decreasing rainfall, urges all stakeholders in agriculture to optimize water use. Various techniques have been developed to address this issue, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. For example, point-scale measurements using sensors embedded in the soil or drilled cores provide high accuracy. However, they also present the paradox of being nearly impossible to implement over vast areas effectively. On the other hand, indirect geophysical methods, such as electromagnetic induction (EMI), offer the advantage of high spatial coverage for measuring bulk electrical conductivity. This conductivity can then be converted into soil moisture through effective petrophysical relationships. In contrast, remote sensing maps can provide valuable information, but these different maps must be correlated to enhance their usefulness. Recent advancements in machine learning optimization techniques have allowed for the integration of datasets from diverse sources to better understand soil responses to water. This has led to a clustering process that can be effectively utilized for targeted water-saving intervention strategies. In a vineyard plot located within the Torre Guaceto Natural Reserve in Southern Italy, a methodological approach combining geophysical data, remote sensing, and hydrological data from multiple sources has been tested to identify optimal water management zones.