---
title: A Synthetic Study of the Cosmic Ray Neutron Sensing Detector Response to Heterogeneous Soils and Moisture Content Distribution for Agrogeophysical Applications
description: The accurate quantification of volumetric water content at the intermediate spatial scale is essential for agriculture, with direct implications for irrigation management and soil health assessment. The interpretation of Cosmic Ray Neutron Sensing data in heterogeneous agricultural fields remains challenging due to complex soil moisture variability and the inherently nonlinear relationship between neutron intensity and hydrogen content.
---

# Abstract

The accurate quantification of volumetric water content (VWC) at the intermediate spatial scale is essential for agriculture, with direct implications for irrigation management and soil health assessment. Cosmic Ray Neutron Sensing (CRNS) is a technique that provides field-scale VWC estimates over footprints of approximately 10–20 ha and depths up to 80 cm. However, the interpretation of CRNS data in heterogeneous agricultural fields remains challenging due to complex soil moisture variability and the inherently nonlinear relationship between neutron intensity and hydrogen content. Consequently, the CRNS signal is disproportionately influenced by drier soil volumes.This study presents a synthetic investigation aimed at characterizing the CRNS detector response under heterogeneous subsurface conditions representative of agricultural environments. The primary objective is to improve CRNS data processing workflows by demonstrating the necessity of integrating prior information derived from complementary geophysical characterization. Synthetic datasets were generated using the URANOS Monte Carlo neutron transport code, considering multiple subsurface models with varying degrees of heterogeneity. These include a realistic model derived from Electromagnetic Induction (EMI) inversion results acquired at the Borgo Grignanello field site (Siena, Italy).The results indicate that, in heterogeneous scenarios, the CRNS-derived VWC closely reflects the moisture conditions of the drier soil fraction, with the magnitude of this effect strongly controlled by the geometry and spatial configuration of subsurface heterogeneities. These findings confirm that the integration of independent prior knowledge on subsurface structure is essential for a robust and physically consistent interpretation of CRNS data, reducing uncertainty and enabling a more accurate field-scale soil moisture assessment.