---
title: Novel methodologies for multi-sensor data fusion for high-resolution soil mapping
description: High-resolution digital soil mapping is essential for precision agriculture, yet most operational mapping still relies on single-sensor surveys, often depending on what is available. This study provides methodological insights into cost-effective multi-sensor data fusion and outlines a practical workflow towards PA and soil digital twins.
---

# Abstract

High-resolution digital soil mapping (DSM) is essential for precision agriculture (PA), yet most operational mapping still relies on single-sensor surveys, often depending on what is available. With this approach, mapping success depends on wise sensor selection for the soil properties of interest. Multi-sensor data fusion is increasingly being acknowledged as an accurate, affordable way to map multiple soil properties simultaneously, since many sensors can now be deployed together in multi-sensor setups without significantly increasing costs. However, a core challenge is the need for development of mathematical methods that can reconcile the mismatch between sparse, information-rich point measurements and dense, on-the-go high-resolution geophysical sensors. This study provides methodological insights into cost-effective multi-sensor data fusion and outlines a practical workflow towards PA and soil digital twins. We fuse visible and near-infrared (vis-NIR) spectra from soil samples selected using conditioned Latin Hypercube Sampling (cLHS) with on-the-go electromagnetic induction (EMI) and gamma-ray spectroscopy (GRS) at a 50-ha arable field in Værum, Jutland, Denmark. A national soil spectral library (SSL) is adapted by spiking with 30 local reference samples and spectra, evaluating alternative spiking strategies to quantify gains in prediction accuracy over unspiked and purely local models. We will apply linear and non-linear models to compare single-sensor, multi-sensor, and SSL spiking schemes for selected soil properties and compare accuracy metrics using cross-validation to assess gains from each strategy. Fusion is expected to combine diagnostic detail with spatial continuity and yield the greatest benefits in accuracy and costs when sensor signals provide complementary information.